---
layout: post
title: Puppet
published: false
---

#### Prologue

In 2004, I was getting ready to graduate from the Texas Academy of Math and Science, and needed to decide what to do next. I'd had a strange career for a [TAMS](http://tams.unt.edu/) student. Most of my peers were early bloomers who had decided early in life on a career in medicine or engineering. I basically just went to TAMS because I thought it would be interesting, and I kind of wanted to get out of the house. My roommate for most of my time there was Adam, and the two of us had pursued a number of creative endeavors over the past two years, theatre productions, Adam's website, a subversive publication (or 'zine as I would have it), and even a movie. (To give a sense of the atmosphere and the time period, Adam and I initially befriended each other because we were two of the only people in the dorm who used Macs.) When it came time to decide on where to go to college, I turned to Adam.

The University of Texas had been ruled out when I got into NYU and Sarah Lawrence, so Adam and I decided to go the traditional Pro/Con route. Our dorm room was one of those lucky ones who cabinetry and doors were wet-erase, so we had plenty of space to sketch. From where we were in the country and academically, it was hard to imagine the differences between the two schools. We had little to go on apart from the course catalog Sarah Lawrence had sent and what we could guess about NYU from their website. One of the things that stood out in my mind at the time about SLC was a course called Puppet Central taught by a man named Dan Hurlin. So into the SLC column went "Dan Hurlin" and into the NYU column went "Dan Schmurlin." It became clear fast that SLC was the right choice. I'd been struggling for two years at UNT to pursue the many things I was interested in despite the restricted nature of the school and the program I was in, and a phone call to the NYU College of Arts and Sciences made it clear that I face even more challenges there when I asked them how difficult it was to change majors. Sarah Lawrence is free of those kind of arbitrary processes in part because there are no majors and in part because the foundation of the school lies in the kind of thinking to which I subscribe. That is to say, who's to say what is really relevant to what and why.

Puppetry is a succinct little microcosm of this, which became clearer to me as I studied with Dan (Hurlin, not Schmurlin) over the next few years. There are a lot of wonderful things that go into piecing together a puppetry show. Building a puppet is a cross between engineering and sculture, and part of the process of making a show is discovering how the puppet you've built actually moves. Then there's the set, which also has to be built and designed. The choreography of the puppets, who are responsible for taking on life despite their decided status as objects. The choreography of the puppeteers, who have to not only make the puppets come to life but have to stay out of the way so as not to obscure the puppets. Oh, and either a story to tell, or at least some kind of action or movement that happens. And an aesthetic that encompasses the whole production, plus possibly music. Visual art meets dance meets theatre meets engineering.

#### The Particulars

This week, as part of the new [DOC NYC](http://www.docnyc.net/) documentary film festival, David Soll premiered a his new film "Puppet." "Puppet" is near and dear to my heart, as it follows the creation story of my puppetry teacher's most recent show "Disfarmer," which has as its central figure Mike Disfarmer, a photographer in a farming community in Arkansas during the first half of the 20th Century.
