---
layout: post
title: Reading and the Brain
published: false
---

I think we all wish things were simpler than they really are. Not in a profound sort of way, but also not in a demeaning sort of way. Maybe in a practical and need-based sort of way. We don't want profound simplicity because absent complications and complexity, there wouldn't be much of interest in life. I also say that our desire for simplicity is not demeaning, because I don't think it comes down to an overly-limited view of our own capacities. While we might think others want things to be simple because we don't think they can handle or cope with complications, we don't usually think that of ourselves. (You may be different, but I don't think of myself as wanting simplicity because I can't handle complexity.) I call it practicality and need because I think the desire and tendency toward simplicity come from a place of balance, proportion, and emphasis. We don't want things that are worth looking at in their nuance and details to be simplified away. What we want is to simplify the uninteresting or in-the-way thing, so that we can keep our attention on the things that we do want to consider, that we want to emphasize.

What I'm saying is that the act of simplification is a way of muting out some noise so as to be throw into relief something that is palatable to the mind to contemplate and grapple with. There are key words that signal a simplification. In English, these are things like "at its root...," "it boils down to...," "when it comes down to it...," "that's just because...," or my pet favorite "at the end of the day..." You've probably heard yourself and others use these constructions. The point I want to make about them is that they reflect a useful tool for thinking: simplifying one thing in order to rule out some of its complexities when considering another, usually related, thing. This stands in stark contrast to another use which simplifies only, but not for any other gain.

I think this is a fairly good rubric for examining an argument which involves simplification. Is the simplification in service of something else, or does it exist for its own sake? In the latter case, I believe that simplification is a mistaken mode, born not out of the desire to ease the explanation and understanding of something more complex, but out of a desire for control. Simplification for its own sake gives a feeling of being "on top of" something that might otherwise seem uncontainable.

----

Here is Stanislas Dehaene in his new book <cite>Reading in the Brain</cite>:

> Over the past thirty years, cognitive psychology has worked on analyzing the mechanics of reading. Its goal is to crack the "algorithm" of visual word recognition--the series of processing steps that a proficient reader applies to the problem of identifying written words. Psychologists treat reading like a computer science problem. Every reader resembles a robot with two cameras--the two eyes and their retinas. The words we read are painted onto them. They first appear only as splotches of light and dark that are not directly interpretable as linguistic signs. Visual information must be recoded in an understandable format before we can access the appropriate sounds, words, and meanings. Thus we must have a deciphering algorithm, or a processing recipe akin to automatic character recognition software, which takes pixels on a page as input and produces the identity of the words as output. To accomplish this feat, unbeknownst to us, our brain hosts a sophisticated set of decoding operations whose principles are only beginning to be understood.